---
layout: default
title: Visit Occurrence
nav_order: 8
parent: IBM MDCD
description: "**VISIT_OCCURRENCE** mapping from IBM MarketScan® Medicaid (MDCD) **OUTPATIENT_SERVICES** & **INPATIENT_SERVICES**."
---

# CDM Table: VISIT_OCCURRENCE

The VISIT_OCCURRENCE table contains all person visits to health care providers, including inpatient, outpatient and ER visits. A visit is an encounter for a patient at a point of care for duration of time. There could be several providers involved in the patient's care during the Visit. In the past, Visits were identified directly from the **INPATIENT_SERVICES** and **OUTPATIENT_SERVICES** tables. Now that there is a hierarchical relationship between Visit concepts we can build Visits off of the **VISIT_DETAIL** similar to how the **DRUG_ERA** table is derived from the **DRUG_EXPOSURE** table. See the [VISIT_OCCURRENCE](#VISIT_OCCURRENCE-Logic) logic for more details.

## **VISIT_OCCURRENCE** Logic
- Using the [terminal ancestor query](https://github.com/OHDSI/ETL-LambdaBuilder/blob/master/docs/Optum%20Clinformatics/Queries/CMS_PlaceOfService_OMOP_Vocab.sql) map the VISIT_DETAIL_CONCEPT_IDs to their highest-level ancestor.
- The highest-level ancestor concept_id will become the VISIT_CONCEPT_ID

### **Inpatient visits**
- Using the results of step 1, find all records in the **VISIT_DETAIL** table that roll up to the CONCEPT_ID 9201 (Inpatient Visit).
- Sort the resulting **VISIT_DETAIL** records by PERSON_ID, VISIT_START_DATETIME, and VISIT_END_DATETIME.
- Collapse records that have <= 1 day between them into one Visit and assign an autogenerated VISIT_OCCURRENCE_ID. This VISIT_OCCURRENCE_ID should be the primary key in the **VISIT_OCCURRENCE** table and the foreign key in the **VISIT_DETAIL** table (and several domain tables) for the records that were collapsed. 
    - Give these Visits VISIT_CONCEPT_ID = 9201. 
    - Set VISIT_START_DATETIME to min(VISIT_DETAIL_START_DATETIME)
    - Set VISIT_END_DATETIME to max(VISIT_DETAIL_END_DATETIME)

### **Emergency Room visits**
- After defining inpatient visits, find all **VISIT_DETAIL** records that roll up to the CONCEPT_ID 9203 (Emergency Room Visit)
- Collapse records that have the same VISIT_DETAIL_START_DATETIME into one Visit. 
    - If an emergency room visit starts on the first day of an Inpatient visit (defined in the step above), then 
        - Assign the emergency room visit the autogenerated VISIT_OCCURRENCE_ID of the Inpatient visit.
        - Set VISIT_CONCEPT_ID = 262 (it would previously have been 9201). 
        - Set VISIT_START_DATETIME = min(VISIT_DETAIL_START_DATETIME)
        - Set VISIT_END_DATETIME = max(VISIT_DETAIL_END_DATETIME)
    - If an emergency room visit occurs at any other point during an inpatient stay then assign the VISIT_OCCURRENCE_ID of the inpatient visit to the emergency room **VISIT_DETAIL** records and no **VISIT_OCCURRENCE** record should be generated. 
    - Otherwise:
        - Assign the emergency room visit an autogenerated VISIT_OCCURRENCE_ID and create a **VISIT_OCCURRENCE** record.
        - Set VISIT_CONCEPT_ID = 9203. 
        - Set VISIT_START_DATETIME = min(VISIT_DETAIL_START_DATETIME)
        - Set VISIT_END_DATETIME = max(VISIT_DETAIL_END_DATETIME)

- The assigned VISIT_OCCURRENCE_IDS should be the primary key in the **VISIT_OCCURRENCE** table and the foreign key in the **VISIT_DETAIL** table for the records that were collapsed. 

### **Rolling additional visit detail into Inpatient**
- For all other **VISIT_DETAIL** records, first look to see if they occur at any point within a previously defined inpatient visit. If so, assign the VISIT_OCCURRENCE_ID of the inpatient visit to the VISIT_DETAIL record. 

## Non-hospital institution visits
- Using the remaining **VISIT_DETAIL** records and the results of step 1, find all records the CONCEPT_ID 42898160 (Non-hospital institution visit).
- Sort the resulting **VISIT_DETAIL** records by PERSON_ID, VISIT_START_DATETIME, and VISIT_END_DATETIME.
- Collapse records that have <= 1 day between them into one Visit and assign an autogenerated VISIT_OCCURRENCE_ID. This VISIT_OCCURRENCE_ID should be the primary key in the **VISIT_OCCURRENCE** table and the foreign key in the **VISIT_DETAIL** table (and several domain tables) for the records that were collapsed. 
    - Give these Visits VISIT_CONCEPT_ID = 42898160. 
    - Set VISIT_START_DATETIME to min(VISIT_DETAIL_START_DATETIME)
    - Set VISIT_END_DATETIME to max(VISIT_DETAIL_END_DATETIME)
### **Rolling additional visit detail into Non-hospital institution visit**
- For all other **VISIT_DETAIL** records, look to see if they occur at any point within a previously defined non-hospital institution visit. If so, assign the VISIT_OCCURRENCE_ID of the non-hospital institution visit to the VISIT_DETAIL record. 

## All other **VISIT_DETAIL** records
- For VISIT_DETAIL records that do not occur within an inpatient or non-hospital institution visit:
    - Sort records by PERSON_ID, VISIT_DETAIL_START_DATETIME, VISIT_DETAIL_END_DATETIME, and CARE_SITE_ID.
    - Collapse all records for the same person that have the same VISIT_DETAIL_START_DATETIME, VISIT_DETAIL_END_DATETIME, and CARE_SITE_ID.
    - Assign the visits an autogenerated VISIT_OCCURRENCE_ID and create a **VISIT_OCCURRENCE** record.
    - Set VISIT_CONCEPT_ID = terminal ancestor concept_id as defined above. 
    - Set VISIT_START_DATETIME = min(VISIT_DETAIL_START_DATETIME)
    - Set VISIT_END_DATETIME = max(VISIT_DETAIL_END_DATETIME)
    - The assigned VISIT_OCCURRENCE_IDS should be the primary key in the **VISIT_OCCURRENCE** table and the foreign key in the **VISIT_DETAIL** table for the records that were collapsed. 

**Destination Field**|**Source Field**|**Applied Rule**|**Comment**
:-----:|:-----:|:-----:|:-----:
VISIT_OCCURRENCE_ID| |System generated.|
PERSON_ID|**VISIT_DETAIL** PERSON_ID||
VISIT_CONCEPT_ID|See the logic above for rolling up **VISIT_DETAIL** VISIT_DETAIL_CONCEPT_ID the the terminal ancestor concept_id.|
VISIT_START_DATE|**VISIT_DETAIL** VISIT_DETAIL_START_DATE| Use min(VISIT_DETAIL_START_DATE) |
VISIT_START_DATETIME|Set time to 00:00:00 UTC tz<br/><br/>**VISIT_DETAIL** VISIT_DETAIL_START_DATETIME| Use min(VISIT_DETAIL_START_DATETIME)  |
VISIT_END_DATE|**VISIT_DETAIL**<br/>VISIT_DETAIL_END_DATE| Use max(VISIT_DETAIL_END_DATE) |
VISIT_END_DATETIME|Set time to 00:00:00 UTC tz<br/><br/>**VISIT_DETAIL**<br/>VISIT_DETAIL_END_DATETIME| Use max(VISIT_DETAIL_END_DATETIME)|
VISIT_TYPE_CONCEPT_ID| |Use concept [32810 (Claim)](http://www.ohdsi.org/web/atlas/#/concept/32810)|
PROVIDER_ID||Use the VISIT_DETAIL records to find provider associated with a visit. If there are more than one provider_id, then sort by inpatient>emergency room>outpatient and pick the first occurrrence by date.|
CARE_SITE_ID|**VISIT_DETAIL** CARE_SITE_ID |  |
VISIT_SOURCE_VALUE|  | This will be blank though the VISIT_OCCURRENCE_ID can be linked back to VISIT_DETAIL which can then be linked to the source through the VISIT_DETAIL_SOURCE_VALUE|
VISIT_SOURCE_CONCEPT_ID| | 0 |
ADMITTING_SOURCE_CONCEPT_ID| | 0 |
ADMITTING_SOURCE_VALUE| | NULL |
DISCHARGE_TO_CONCEPT_ID|**VISIT_DETAIL**<br/>DISCHARGE_TO_CONCEPT_ID|Use the VISIT_DETAIL records to find DISCHARGE_TO_CONCEPT_ID associated with a visit. If there are more than one then sort by inpatient>emergency room>outpatient and pick the first occurrrence by date. |
DISCHARGE_TO_SOURCE_VALUE|**VISIT_DETAIL**<br/>DISCHARGE_TO_SOURCE_VALUE| | Use the VISIT_DETAIL records to find DISCHARGE_TO_SOURCE_VALUE associated with a visit. If there are more than one then sort by inpatient>emergency room>outpatient and pick the first occurrrence by date.|
PRECEDING_VISIT_OCCURRENCE_ID|**VISIT_OCCURRENCE** | For a given person, find the previous visit and reference it. | A foreign key to the **VISIT_OCCURRENCE** table of the visit immediately preceding. 

## Change Log

### June 8, 2021
* Updated VISIT_OCCURRENCE logic to comply with logic in other CDMs. It now uses the information in VISIT_DETAIL to build Visits.
