---
title: "Provider"
author: "Andryc, A; Fortin, S"
parent: Premier
nav_order: 16
layout: default
---

# Table Name: Provider

Premier does provide individual providers for each visit, and it houses the admitting and attending provider specialty for each visit. For Premier, each hospital will have a set of providers which will be identified with a unique key generated by Premier. Two providers will be indicated for each visit, an admitting provider, and an attending provider. In most cases these fields are the same, thus the assumption is made to use admitting provider for each stay. Each provider is linked to a specialty. In addition, each provider will be linked to a Premier hospital through the PROV_ID.  The mapping for the specialties from the PHYSPEC table to valid concepts is in the mapping table in the appendix. Any providers that are not listed in the look up tables are added manually and associated to an unknown provider. The mapping table uses the most closely matching concept value. 
 
Procedure providers, PATICD_PROC.PROC_PHY, are associated with procedure records from PATICD_PROC. Procedure providers will be associated with PROCEDURE_OCCURRENCE records only. Procedure providers will also move to the PROVIDER table with an associated PROCPHY_SPEC. Often, the procedure physician and admitting physician are the same person (ADM_PHY = PROC_PHY). 

Admitting and attending physician keys are defaulted to 99999999 and physician specialty is set to 900 when these data are not provided by the hospital. Move PAT.ADM_PHY=99999999 to PROVIDER.PROVIDER_ID=99999999. Similarly, some providers have unknown specialty, admphy_spec=900, set these to PROVIDER.PROVIDER_ID=38004514. 

The field mapping is as follows: 

| Destination Field  | Source Field  | Applied Rule  | Comment  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| PROVIDER_ID  | PAT.ADM_PHY   | System generated unique code  |  |
| PROVIDER_NAME  | -  | NULL  |  |
| NPI  | -  | NULL  |  |
| DEA  | -  | NULL  |  |
"| SPECIALTY_CONCEPT_ID  |  | QUERY: SOURCE TO STANDARD
SELECT TARGET_CONCEPT_ID FROM CTE_VOCAB_MAP WHERE SOURCE_VOCABULARY_ID = 'JNJ_PMR_P_SPCLTY'  |  |"
| CARE_SITE_ID  | PAT.PROV_ID  |  |  |
| YEAR_OF_BIRTH  | -  | NULL  |  |
| GENDER_CONCEPT_ID  | -  | NULL  |  |
| PROVIDER_SOURCE_VALUE  | PAT.ADMPHY_SPEC  |  |  |
| SPECIALTY_SOURCE_VALUE  | PHYSPEC.PHY_SPEC_DESC  |  |  |
| SPECIALITY_SOURCE_CONCEPT_ID  | -  | NULL  |  |
| GENDER_SOURCE_VALUE  | -  | NULL  |  |
| GENDER_SOURCE_CONCEPT_ID  | -  | NULL  |  |
